---
layout:            post
title:             "Rule of 4.5"
date:              2023-03-08
tags:              CPP
category:          CPP
author:            hongyuan

---

There's a great answer in StackOverflow https://stackoverflow.com/a/68063321:

> In simple terms, just remember this.
>
> - Rule of 0:
> `Classes have neither custom destructors, copy/move constructors or copy/move assignment operators.`
> - Rule of 3: If you implement a custom version of any of these, you implement all of them.
> `Destructor, Copy constructor, copy assignment`
> - Rule of 5: If you implement a custom move constructor or the move assignment operator, you need to define all 5 of them. Needed for move semantics.
> `Destructor, Copy constructor, copy assignment, move constructor, move assignment`
> - Rule of four and a half: Same as Rule of 5 but with copy and swap idiom. With the inclusion of the swap method, the copy assignment and move assignment merge into one assignment operator.
> `Destructor, Copy constructor, move constructor, assignment, swap (the half part)`

```cpp
// Rule of 4.5
~Class();
Class(Class&);
Class(Class&&);
Class& operator=(Class); // pass by value, don't define `Class& operator=(Class&&)`
void swap(Class &);      // or `friend void swap(Class&, Class&)`
```

> There are no warnings, the advantage is that it is faster in assignment as a pass by value copy is actually more efficient than creating a temporary object in the body of the method.
>
> And now that we have that temporary object, we simply perform a swap on the temporary object. It's automatically destroyed when it goes out of scope and we now have the value from the right-hand side of the operator in our object.

My thoughts:

- Rule of 4.5 is good!
- Rule of 5 is discouraged because:
    - Code cannot be reused
    - Self-assignment problem
    - Doesn't have strong exception safety
- Rule of 5.5 is also discouraged because:
    - It's doing the same thing as rule of 4.5 but just adding more noise
    - Not as safe in terms of exception handling.

My demo implementations:
- [rule of 4.5](https://github.com/HongyuanH/playground/blob/main/cpp/src/rule_of_four_point_five.cpp)
- [rule of 5](https://github.com/HongyuanH/playground/blob/main/cpp/src/rule_of_five.cpp)
- [rule of 5.5](https://github.com/HongyuanH/playground/blob/main/cpp/src/rule_of_five_point_five.cpp)
